DOCS-3390: Apply Micro-RDK feedback (#3896)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/operate/get-started/other-hardware/micro-module.md

  - /installation/viam-micro-server-dev/
---

> [The Micro-RDK](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/) is the lightweight version of Viam's full Robot Development Kit, designed for resource-limited embedded systems (ESP32) that cannot run the fully-featured `viam-server`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[The Micro-RDK](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/) is the lightweight version of Viam's full Robot Development Kit (RDK), designed for resource-limited embedded systems (ESP32) that cannot run the fully-featured `viam-server`.
```

`viam-micro-server` is the pre-built firmware built from the Micro-RDK and a default set of {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="module" text="modules" >}}, provided for convenience.
If you want to use different modules with the Micro-RDK, you can build your own firmware using the instructions on this page.

{{< alert title="Looking to install viam-micro-server?" color="note" >}}
If you only want to install the pre-built `viam-micro-server` firmware with a default set of modules, follow the normal [setup instructions](/operate/get-started/setup/) instead.
{{< /alert >}}

{{< expand "Why does the Micro-RDK work differently from the full RDK?" >}}
Microcontrollers do not have full operating systems like single-board computers and general-purpose computers.

> This means that it is generally harder to make software portable across multiple microcontrollers, and it means that microcontrollers can only run one "program" at a time.
> 
> Rather than being able to download and install an executable the way you can on a computer or single-board computer, a microcontroller must be flashed with firmware containing the entire logic to run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that microcontrollers can only run one "program" at a time, and a microcontroller must be flashed with firmware containing the entire logic to run.
```

Suggesting to remove the part about portability; that's more an internal note on why we have been carefully selecting which microcontroller models to support :)

Author: Ah okay great thank you, makes sense--and I'm happy to cut out excess text anyway.

The Micro-RDK is a version of the RDK library written in Rust and designed to run on microcontrollers.
The Micro-RDK includes built-in support for several common hardware components, such as standard DC motors and an ultrasonic sensor.
Viam provides a default firmware build that includes the Micro-RDK as well as two modules: a wifi sensor and a memory heap sensor.

> You may well want to use additional modules, in which case you will need to build your own custom firmware, that includes the Micro-RDK as well as one or more Micro-RDK-compatible modules of your own creation or that others have shared.

Author: ```suggestion
You can use additional modules to support more or other hardware by building custom firmware from the Micro-RDK and one or more Micro-RDK-compatible modules.
```

{{< /expand >}}

The instructions below are for configuring a development environment in order to:

- Develop custom firmware which combines the Micro-RDK with one or more modules.
- Develop modules for the Micro-RDK.

> For advanced topics including development of the Micro-RDK itself, to add features and fix bugs, or to produce a build for a specific ESP-IDF version or platform for which Viam does not offer a pre-built solution, see [Viam Micro-RDK Development on GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/blob/main/DEVELOPMENT.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For advanced topics including development of the Micro-RDK itself, see [Viam Micro-RDK Development on GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/blob/main/DEVELOPMENT.md).
```

Suggesting this because (1) it generally makes sense that for adding features or fixing bugs, a user would go to the github, and (2) it might be confusing to see "pre-built" when referring to ESP-IDF version, since we're mostly using "pre-built" when talking about viam-micro-server. (I'm also not totally sure what the pre-built ESP-IDF part is referring to 😅).

{{< alert title="Note" color="tip" >}}
Prior versions of the above `espup` instructions created a file called `export-rs.sh` which needed to be sourced before proceeding.
That requirement [no longer applies](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-idf-hal/issues/319#issuecomment-1785168921) for Micro-RDK development.
The above command redirects `espup`'s production of the setup script to `/dev/null` to avoid cluttering the home directory.
If you would like to instead retain the setup script, replace `/dev/null` in the above command with the location where you would like the script to be written, or remove the `-f /dev/null` entirely and the file will be written to `$HOME/export-esp.sh` by default.
{{< /alert >}}

## Build custom firmware

> To create firmware that integrates an existing module with the Micro-RDK, and flash your machine with it, follow these steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create firmware that integrates an existing module with the Micro-RDK, and flash your microcontroller with it, follow these steps.
```

1. Develop the module by defining `structs` which implement the necessary `traits` and adding tests and registration hooks for them, per the walkthrough.

1. To consume the module, follow the "Create a Project" workflow in a different directory, and register your module in the `dependencies` section of the project's `Cargo.toml` file, then build and flash the project.
1. To consume the module, follow the [Build custom firmware](#build-custom-firmware) workflow in a different directory, and register your module in the `dependencies` section of the project's `Cargo.toml` file, then build and flash the project.
   The module will now be available for use by adding it to your machine configuration on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

> {{% /tab %}}

Author: It was suggested to remove this because we don't cover RDK development anywhere in the docs, and this info could live in the micro readmes instead. The cloning steps seem pretty obvious/unnecessary since someone competent enough to develop this probably knows how to clone a repo, and the make build stuff is covered in the other section, but you're right the make native command doesn't appear to be covered elsewhere. Do you think it is all useful even the cloning steps?

> {{% /tab %}}

Reviewer 2: ok
